of their view whilst they applauded.
Back at the North look in Nora’s
hospital, a group of nurses told us
how the applause makes them feel.
Very proud grip it’s nice to be
appreciated. Another chance to say
thank you to the people who care for
thank you to the peopla who rare for
us.
Thanks to all of you
who got in contact.
We’ll do it again next Thursday.
But now, it’s Alex and the weather.
Good night.
Hello. We’ve had some heavy showers
affecting the region today, and
there’s still some further showers
to come for this evening and
overnight. They will clearly ‘s so
overnight. They will dearty ‘s so
most places
overnight. They will clearly ‘s so
most places have a dry and to the
night, although one or could linger.
Under any clear skies are
temperatures being brought down to
around five Celsius. A little chilly
in one or two spots. Low pressure
still of the theme for the day
tomorrow. That will mean more
showers, but it looks as though
there will be more isolated
tomorrow. Into the afternoon, cloud
building and still the possibility
of a heavy and shunned thunder a
shower somewhere.
showersomewhere. Some
of a heavy and shunned thunder a
shower somewhere. Some parts should
have a dry day. Temperature is
getting to around 1A—15d, but the
getting to around 14-1511, but the
chance
getting to around 1A—15d, but the
chance of the showers continues for
the afternoon and into the evening.
In a moment, the national weather’s
coming up but he is the outlook and
it’s readily doing —— relatively
it’s readily doing -- relatively
settled.
it’s readily doing —— relatively
settled. Claudia —— cloudy at
m:
We might as well have had to wait
right to the end of the month before
we saw a decent batch of April
showers and it was a day that if you
got a shower you did quite well
because most will have seen it three
or four and you
orfour and you can see how
extensive they were in some of them
were spectacular. Large hail coming
down in Buckinghamshire and further
north in Scotland, we had this cloud
of dropping from the skies from one
of the thunderstorms. Overnight
tonight, plenty more showers to come
tonight, planty more showers to come
as well, but
tonight, plenty more showers to come
as well, but they will be most
frequent and the heaviest in
northern Wales and northern England
northern Walas and northern England
and
northern Wales and northern England
and the Midlands as we pass
underneath the heart of the area of
low pressure. Temperatures between a
3-7 and
3—7 and tomorrow, another day of
3-7 and tomorrow, another day of
sunshine
3—7 and tomorrow, another day of
sunshine and showers as we switch
into May. Quite blustery over parts
of southern England and southern
Walas
Wales and the showers might last 20
Walas and the showers might last 20
minutes
Wales and the showers might last 20
minutes but there will be large
stretches of the day when it will be
dry with sunshine. Further north,
the winds are lighter and so the
downpours could be quite lengthy,
downpours could be quite langthy,
and for
downpours could be quite lengthy,
and for southern Scotland and
Northern Ireland and northern
England the showers will be at their
heaviest in the afternoon with a
threat of hail and thunder. Into the
weekend, winds will ease down but we
are expecting further showers
especially over northern and eastern
areas of the UK and although there
will
Hi! Hello!
I’m Dave.
You might know me as Lil Dicky.
But there’s a lot more to me.
Don’t you wanna know who I am?
Not really!
Do you want to meet the guy behind
the guy? Hoo!
Do you wanna know what the industry
is like? I got a strange life!
# Yes I know that I’m a rapper
at the end of the day
# But I think it’s time you knew me
by my government name
# I am Dave.
Please. I’m Lil Dicky. Now shut up.
# I am Dave! #
As the pandemic of coronavirus
claims more lives around the world
the people of the United Kingdom
are now being advised
to make drastic changes.
The virus is indiscriminate.
When things go wrong, as they
sometimes will...
The sight of airports, unused.
"and the road you’re trudging seems
all uphill...
I think I’m too late.
..and the funds are low
but the debts are high...
..and you want to smile
but you have to sigh.
I didn’t take this virus seriously
until I saw this.
Don’t give up,
though the pace seems slow.
Stay in, people. Stay in at home.
You may succeed with another blow.
Here we are again, of course,
with no audience.
Success is failure
turned inside out.
Keep it up, men,
you’re doing very well.
The silver tint
of the clouds of doubt.
You can never tell
how close you were.
My mind is free. Ha!
I can be anywhere.
It may be near, but it seems so far.
What is that?
So stick to the fight
when you’re hardest hit.
It’s when things seem worst
that you must not quit.
Welcome to Question Time. On
tonight’s panel, Grant Shapps,
Secretary of State for Transport and
former chairman of the Conservative
Party. Laboqu
Party. Labour’s newly appointed
Shadow Chancellor Anneliese Dodds.
jeane
Jeane Freeman, the Scottish
Government Secretary for health
joining us from Edinburgh. Leading
UK scientist, former president of
the Royal Society and chief
executive of the Francis Crick
Institute, Sir Paul Nurse, and
George Osborne, editor of the
Evening Standard in London and
former Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Good evening, welcome to my guests
here in the studio, socially
distance of course. Jeane Freeman,
distance of course. jeane Freeman,
thank you for
distance of course. Jeane Freeman,
thank you forjoining us from
thank you for joining us from
Edinburgh.
thank you forjoining us from
Edinburgh. And we have no studio
audience here for the reasons we all
know, but this time we have taken
pre-recorded
pre—recorded questions from Leeds
pre-recorded questions from Leeds
and we
pre—recorded questions from Leeds
and we have been hearing from you
via social media, and I will be
feeding those in as we go throughout
the programme. You can continue to
the programme. You ran continue to
join in on social
the programme. You can continue to
join in on social media. Let’s take
our first
ourfirst question,
join in on social media. Let’s take
our first question, which
ourfirst question, which is
join in on social media. Let’s take
our first question, which is from
Hannah Robinson. Britain is set to
have the worst death toll in Europe
from Cobh at 19, were a decade of
austerity has left us unprepared.
There will be an economic cost as a
result of this crisis. How will you
ensure it is not paid for by the
poorest in society with further
austerity measures? There will be a
big bill at the end of this, Grant.
First of all, I want to caution and
looking at the figures we are all
aware of coming out every day, at
the press conferences, and making an
assumption about where that puts us
in the global league table. There
was a good article by Professor
was a good artida by Professor
David
was a good article by Professor
David Siegel today in the Guardian,
where he explained why you cannot do
those comparisons. Hang on a second,
the reason Hannah is making the
comparison because you show the
comparison herause you show the
graphs at the
comparison because you show the
graphs at the press conference.
Today as yesterday it showed Britain
on course, by the looks of things,
to have the worst death toll in
Europe. You would know about this.
These are difficult to compare, so
we have to be careful about it. It
would be fair to say we are not
doing very well. We could get into a
discussion about the statistics, but
discussion about the statistic, but
my point is we
discussion about the statistics, but
my point is we need to judge it at
the end of this when we can look at
the end of this when we ran look at
the excess
the end of this when we can look at
the excess deaths in any given year,
which I think is the scientific way.
Do you accept what he is saying?
That we are not doing very well?
when you
When you look at where we started on
when you look at where we started on
this, it has
When you look at where we started on
this, it has been said at the
beginning that a worst—case scenario
beginning that a worst-case scenario
is half a
beginning that a worst—case scenario
is half a million deaths. And we
have not seen what we saw in other
countries. We saw those pictures
which we looked at in horror where
Italy was ahead of us and people
were literally on the floor in
were literally on the ﬂoor in
hospitals
were literally on the floor in
hospitals or outside. We built eight
Nightingale hospitals in next to no
time. Today capacity in urgent care,
time. Today capacity in urgent rare,
critical
time. Today capacity in urgent care,
critical care rather, is about 50%
critical rare rather, is about 5096
availabla,
critical care rather, is about 50%
available, and numbers in critical
availabla, and numbers in critical
rare are falling.
available, and numbers in critical
care are falling. Lots of things
rare are falling. Lots of things
like that,
care are falling. Lots of things
like that, and bringing in
incubators, have gone very much a
plan thanks to the enormous efforts
of everybody in the NHS and beyond.
So why are our debts so high? I
differ of course always to medical
and scientific advice and that is
what the government has been doing
all the way through. The scientific
advisers are saying there are lots
of reasons because of demographics,
of reasons because of demographic,
age, obesity
of reasons because of demographics,
age, obesity plays a part, the
health of the population. If you
look at, for example, the south—west
look at, for example, the south-west
of the UK
look at, for example, the south—west
of the UK and down in Cornwall, the
deaths are relatively low, whereas
in London at the beginning, it is a
much more dense and compact city,
they were much higher. There were a
of factors, but the key factor to
look at at the end is the excess
deaths over a normal year and I
encourage people to look at the
article in the Guardian where the
professor goes into detail. Since we
have got you here, Sir Paul Nurse,
what is your view on this? This is
only part of Hannah’s question. It
is difficult to make comparisons
between different countries, they
count deaths in different ways. We
will have to look at it in the end,
but we are right to think we could
be doing better. There are various
reasons which I hope we will explore
duﬂng
during the programme. What do you
during the programme. what do you
think they are?
during the programme. What do you
think they are? I would start with
the fact that we were totally
unprepared for it and we should have
been prepared for it. The fact was
there was a review of the
functioning of the NHS, how it would
work in a pandemic, it happened to
be an influenza one, it was never
be an inﬂuenza one, it was never
published, it
be an influenza one, it was never
published, it was three years ago.
And we didn’t do well, we failed.
Was there any action? I did not see
any action, it was not even
published. Austerity was mentioned.
Was the NHS well enough funded to
actually take that report seriously
and lead when the pandemic took
place in a really getting on the
front foot? We have been playing
catch up for this entire pandemic.
when it is
When it is analysed we will see that
when it is analysed we will see that
we did
When it is analysed we will see that
we did not do very well. But you are
right, we have to look at the
figures carefully and it is still
out there exactly where we will be,
but it is our lack of preparation
which was the start of our trouble.
which was the start of our troubla.
I don’t
which was the start of our trouble.
I don’t want to say everything is
perfect and there is nothing we
could have done differently, don’t
be ridiculous. But it is the case in
be ridiculous. But it is the use in
some of
be ridiculous. But it is the case in
some of the best health care systems
some of the best health rare systems
in the world,
some of the best health care systems
in the world, Italy and Spain for
example, they had worse problems.
The preparation that was taking
place for a pandemic, an ordinary
inﬂuenza
influenza pandemic, whereas what we
inﬂuenza pandemic, whereas what we
have got is
influenza pandemic, whereas what we
have got is something very global in
nature which has led to big
nature which has lad to big
shortages
nature which has led to big
shortages in things like PPE and the
rest of it. Given all those
circumstances, and we will have to
judge this at the end, but given
those circumstances the way this
country has responded has been
remarkable and impressive in many
remarkabla and impressive in many
ways, with
remarkable and impressive in many
ways, with those ventilators being
offered up by 12,500 companies
coming forward to see how they can
coming forward to see how they ran
help, and a lot
coming forward to see how they can
help, and a lot of those officers
have been taken up with Lord Dyson
behind it. Please call me Paul. I
think there were some very simple
things we should have had. A
warehouse or two full protective
clothing. That would have been
simple to do. That was really not
right. just to
right. Just to understand the scale
right. just to understand the scale
of this thing,
right. Just to understand the scale
of this thing, we probably had a
warehouse or two, but what we needed
was a brilliant pieces delivered.
Including single gloves. Yes, but
Including singla gloves. Yes, but
also pairs of
Including single gloves. Yes, but
also pairs of gloves and four gloves
counted as one. Let me bring in
Anneliese. Very few people would say
the preparation was there to the
degree it should have been. But to
be honest with you, I am not here to
put blame on anyone, I am here to
55V
say what ran we
put blame on anyone, I am here to
say what can we do to fix this? My
say what ran we do to fix this? My
goodness, we
say what can we do to fix this? My
goodness, we need to fix it. We need
to deal with the blockages and need
to listen to what the people on the
front line are saying to us and take
action. For example, around the
enormous shortages that still exist
in protective equipment, and we saw
that on the Panorama programme
recently, there are shortages. We
set out a whole range of things that
we think need to be done. Around
testing we just missed the target
set out before. I will not
set out before. I will notjump up
set out before. I will not jump up
and down
set out before. I will notjump up
and down and say isn’t that an
incredible thing? We have to fix it.
It was that 100,000 target. To be
clear, there is now over 90,000 test
capacity. 81,500 tests were carried
out today. We will see tomorrow
whether we have met that target.
There are more labs coming in and
the Cambridge super testing lab does
not open until Monday. You have got
quite a lot to say on testing, which
we will come to in a moment. Let’s
deal with the other half of Hannah’s
question. (“an
question. Can you ensure the
economic cost of this crisis is not
paid for by the poorest in society
with further austerity measures?
What Hannah highlighted in her
what Hannah highlighted in her
question
What Hannah highlighted in her
question was the decision is taken
over the last ten years have left us
unprepared. If you look at social
rare, we had
care, we had 120,000 vacancies in
rare, we had 120,000 vacancies in
social rare
care, we had 120,000 vacancies in
social care even before this crisis
social rare even before this crisis
started.
social care even before this crisis
started. We have been talking about
the decisions taken in the NHS
because of a lack of funding. We did
because of a lack offunding. We did
have that
because of a lack of funding. We did
have that additional funding in the
20005, we did not have additional
funding from 2010 onwards.
Preparedness seemed to slip off the
agenda. We cannot be in that
situation again. Are you saying this
is partly George was my fault? He
was Chancellor. I think the
statistics do make the case very
statistis do make the use very
dearty. I
dearty. lam
statistics do make the case very
clearly. I am not going to point the
dearty. I am not going to point the
finger, but we
clearly. I am not going to point the
finger, but we had that lack of
preparedness and lack of resilience
in our public services. But this is
also about households’ financial
resilience
resilience as well. 9% of our
resilience as well. 996 of our
population
resilience as well. 9% of our
population are due to be unemployed.
We entered this crisis with a
quarter of families not giving
having £100 of savings after the
longest squeeze in living standards
that our country has seen for eight
generations, the slowest recovery
after a financial crisis for
hundreds of years. That is something
that we cannot repeat. George, your
record is
that we rannot repeat. George, your
record is being
that we cannot repeat. George, your
record is being called into question
record is being railed into question
here, and in
record is being called into question
here, and in terms of Hannah’s
question how can we ensure the cost
question how ran we ensure the cost
of all this
question how can we ensure the cost
of all this is not paid for by
further austerity measures. Do you
think you are partly responsible for
the situation the NHS is in? Then
how do we get out of this? There is
a terrible trap in the British
political debate that somehow
Britain is unique and we are either
uniquely bad or uniquely good at
things. In all the elements of
Hannah’s question Britain is
experiencing things that other
countries like us are experiencing.
First of all in the pandemic itself,
we are in the middle of the pack. We
are not as good as the government
claims, dearty,
claims, clearly, but nor
are not as good as the government
claims, clearly, but norare
claims, clearly, but nor are we as
claims, dearty, but nor are we as
bad as
claims, clearly, but nor are we as
bad as what some of the critics say.
bad as what some of the critis say.
We have
bad as what some of the critics say.
We have not had the testing as
quickly as we would have liked, we
went into the lockdown too slowly.
But the hospitals have not fallen
over and the capacity has been built
and people are getting the
ventilators when they need them. It
is a different story in social care.
is a different story in social rare.
Even in
is a different story in social care.
Even in social care other countries
Even in social rare other countries
in Europe are
Even in social care other countries
in Europe are having terrible
problems and things like protective
equipment, Germany is doing very
well, but the doctors are protesting
they did not have the protective
equipment. I think we are somewhere
in the middle. In terms of
preparedness we were not as
well—prepared as we should have been
well-prepared as we should have been
for a pandemic
well—prepared as we should have been
for a pandemic that was not a
pandemic flu. All the contingency
pandemic ﬂu. All the contingency
planning I
pandemic flu. All the contingency
planning I saw many years ago was
about pandemic flu. That was not
about pandemic ﬂu. That was not
just a bunch of
about pandemic flu. That was not
just a bunch of politicians thinking
about what we had to prepare for, it
was the expert community as well.
There ran
There can be serious lessons, but
There ran be serious lessons, but
again no country
There can be serious lessons, but
again no country was particularly
again no country was particularty
well
again no country was particularly
well prepared in the West. Finally
on austerity, the last time I was on
Question Time was ten years ago and
I was the Shadow Chancellor and we
were having the same debate.
Austerity in this country and
elsewhere and in every other country
was the consequence of a massive
financial crash. That is what blew
financial crash. That is what blur
the
financial crash. That is what blew
the finances of every major economy.
There is a basic truth about
economics which is in the end you
economic which is in the end you
ran
economics which is in the end you
can borrow
economic which is in the end you
ran borrow your
economics which is in the end you
can borrow your way through the
ran borrow your way through the
emergency,
can borrow your way through the
emergency, but in the end if your
country is poorer than it was, and
that sadly will be the case for us,
that sadly will be the use for us,
we will
that sadly will be the case for us,
we will have to face very questions,
whether it be Anneliese or Rishi
Sunak as Chancellor, about how you
cut your doth.
cut your cloth. You can increase
cut your doth. You ran increase
taxes
cut your cloth. You can increase
taxes because you want to spend more
on the NHS, or you will have to keep
taxes as they are and spend less.
That is just a basic rule about
That is just a basic mla about
countrrs
That is just a basic rule about
country’s finances. I faced these
countrrs finances. I faced these
questions
country’s finances. I faced these
questions many years ago and I
believe we did it in a way that kept
people in work. In that government
peopla in work. In that government
more jobs
people in work. In that government
more jobs were created than any
government in British history. And I
saying they were easy decisions? Am
I saying that the poor and
vulnerable are immune when the
economy crashes? Of course not. They
are often the most exposed and you
have to do everything you can to
have to do everything you ran to
help them
have to do everything you can to
help them through. But to think
there is money when there is not is
a regular fault in
a regularfault in politics. Are you
a regular fault in politic. Are you
saying there
a regularfault in politics. Are you
saying there will be austerity Mark
two? I do not think it will be the
same. But the drop is deeper because
we have shut
we have shutdown
same. But the drop is deeper because
we have shut down the economy. But I
think the recovery will be more
quickly. Financial crises in the
banks have been long and drawn out.
Much of Europe was only recovering
from the crash a couple of years ago
that happened a decade ago. Recovery
will take place more quickly, but
the basic truth is our country,
because of this virus, is not as
rich as we thought it would be, and
rich as we thought it would he, and
a bunch of
rich as we thought it would be, and
a bunch of people queueing up saying
we want to pay everyone more, we
want a universal Basic income, we
will spend more money on public
services, I would love that to be
the rase, I
the case, I love this country, but
the use, I love this country, but
the truth
the rase, I love this country, but
the truth is you
the case, I love this country, but
the truth is you have to pay for it
and you ran be
and you can be honest and say taxes
and you ran be honest and say taxes
will go up, and I
and you can be honest and say taxes
will go up, and I was the person who
put up taxes like VAT, or you say,
I’m afraid we have to cut our cloth
I’m afraid we have to cut our doth
accordingly.
I’m afraid we have to cut our cloth
accordingly. That debate is only
just starting in British politics.
just starting in British politic.
It is not
just starting in British politics.
It is not happening now because we
are in the middle of a pandemic. I
suspect the politics of the next
suspect the politic of the next
general
suspect the politics of the next
general election will be all about
the economy, the economy has moved
centre stage into British politics.
You have been listening patiently in
Edinburgh, how are we going to pay
for it? Politicians, political
leaders, their starting point has to
be a cause of considerable regret.
be a cause of considerabla regret.
MY
be a cause of considerable regret.
My second point is, I don’t think
any political leader or politician
in Scotland or the UK should ever
claim that we are confident that we
have got everything right so far,
all that we will get everything
right. We said at the outset, this
virus is about 130 days old in terms
of our emerging knowledge and
understanding of it and things
change and we have to be able to
change our response and our
approach. There have been real
positives in terms of how our staff
in the NHS and social care have
in the NHS and social rare have
responded in
in the NHS and social care have
responded in creating that
significant additional capacity. Our
intensive care capacity is a quarter
intensive rare capacity is a quarter
of what it
intensive care capacity is a quarter
of what it is capable of. Our
caregivers have to be thanked from
the bottom of our hearts for
everything they have done and the
sacrifices they have made to get us
to this place where we are
suppressing the virus. Not enough
suppressing the vims. Not enough
vet.
yet, but we
suppressing the virus. Not enough
yet, but we are suppressing it. Do
you think Scotland could have taken
a different path at any stage,
jeane? I
Jeane? I think Scotland’s
approaching this, my approach and
the approach of our First Minister,
Anneliese Dodds touched on it, in
facing a pandemic, ordinary
political disagreements have to be
put to one side. I undoubtedly have
significant political differences
with
significa nt political differences
with Matt
significant political differences
with Matt Hancock, my counterpart
for the health service in England. I
believe in independence and he
absolutely doesn’t. But we have to
find ways to work together because
that is our best option for dealing
with this pandemic. Notwithstanding
that we have a responsibility here
in Scotland. I do for our health
service, but where I think the
evidence takes me to a place where
the decision is right for the people
of Scotland, for the health and
social care services in Scotland
social rare services in Scotland
would
social care services in Scotland
would differ from any of the other
four nations, I clearly set that out
four nations, I dearty set that out
because
four nations, I clearly set that out
because that is where my
responsibility lies. I think we have
had some preparedness, we do have a
national distribution service to
order, secure and distribute PPE. So
there are differences between how
our health services run between
our health services mn between
England, for
our health services run between
England, for example, and Scotland.
jeane, getting
Jeane, getting to the second half of
jeane, getting to the second half of
the question,
Jeane, getting to the second half of
the question, when it comes to
paying for this at the end of the
day, how do you see it happening? I
think Hannah has touched on an
important point. One of the key
principles, if you like, we set out
in the document we published last
week which is really the beginning
of a conversation with the people of
Scotland. It sets out the framework
of how we will make decisions about,
not only what steps what we might
ease coming out of the current
lockdown, but also how we plan ahead
for Scotland’s future to renew our
country, that includes our economy.
But part of that is to say that
whilst this is a terrible situation
and we are by no means through it
yet.
yet, we also ran
and we are by no means through it
yet, we also can see that in that
yet, we also ran see that in that
situation
yet, we also can see that in that
situation some things have been
thrown up, the key workers, workers
in the health and social care
in the health and social rare
services,
in the health and social care
services, delivering food, working
in supermarkets, keeping the basics
in supermarkets, keeping the basis
of our
in supermarkets, keeping the basics
of our infrastructure running are
of our infrastmclure mnning are
actually some
of our infrastructure running are
actually some of the worst paid
peopla in
people in our society. And if we are
peopla in our society. And if we are
going to
people in our society. And if we are
going to maximise the chance to
renew our country in Scotland, and I
hope in the rest of the UK, we need
to take
hhha
hope in the rest of the UK, we need
to take a serious look at how we
want to address any inequality of
income, any inequalities of
advantage and that does include
looking at the practicalities of a
Universal Basic Income. In Scotland,
we don’t have the powers that would
allow us to introduce that. But it
will be a conversation that we will
want to have. Let’s put some of that
to the panel. The questions about
austerity, will we see a new period
of austerity? The Prime Minister at
the press conference today, the
first one obviously since he has
been unwell. He said the economy
would bounce back strongly and then
he said I have never liked the term
austerity and it will be part of our
approach. Do you want to enlighten
us about this a bit more? The first
thing I want to say, I agree a lot
with the way the devolved
administrations have worked on this,
it has been more Cross Country
across party as well. I speak to my
opposite number quite frequently,
including yesterday. 0K,
including yesterday. OK, but in
terms of what was said today? I
think the word you attach is the
important thing. Absolutely, he said
I have never liked that word. How
you climb out of it is the
interesting thing and the important
thing. As George has said, we all
know you cannot forever spend money
you have not got. On the other hand
this could be more of the V shaped
recovery we hope it is, in other
words we went into a very steeply as
the economy shut
the economy shutdown, we may open
the economy shut down, we may open
“P
up the economy
the economy shutdown, we may open
up the economy and come out of it. I
don’t think as a straight line going
“P
up but not as a ten year recovery
programme. It is undeniable there
will be a new debt are formed by it.
I would venture to say the well’s
I would venture to say the Hell’s
attitude
I would venture to say the well’s
attitude towards this, because it
has happened on a global basis, may
be different to the financial crisis
of 2008 where the problems were
banks in danger of going bust. I
think the lending markets, the
global markets may now accept a
certain level of debts. That is an
unknown, as yet and we will have to
see where we are up to. We will not
know for some months to come, may be
more like a year or so, who knows?
How the economy has come back out of
this and until we know that we
cannot judge
cannotjudge the situation. If
cannot judge the situation. If
austerity is
cannotjudge the situation. If
austerity is not going to be part, a
tax rise might be? What we have to
tax rise might be? what we have to
do is
tax rise might be? What we have to
do is consider it for what it is,
which is a crisis which, rather like
a war, you have no choice but to pay
for. But as we saw after the war is
this country has gone through, the
last war, we came back and became a
stronger country and we can do that
stronger country and we ran do that
again. I
again. Iwant
stronger country and we ran do that
again. I want to
stronger country and we can do that
again. I want to respond to Hannah’s
original point, which is we will not
do the kind of, as she said,
concerned about people who are the
least well off. This government in
particular were elected only in
December on the basis of left behind
communities, the town is world had
moved on without them and a lot of
my work to do with the Northern
Powerhouse and the Cabinet with the
levelling up agenda and we will not
forget that. Today, I have been
working on that agenda. When we come
working on that agenda. when we come
out of this, things
working on that agenda. When we come
out of this, things like
reconnecting communities by
reversing those Beeching cuts to
railways and that sort of thing,
will be absolutely front and centre
of our programme. We should urge a
little caution that we are just
going to recover that quickly. We
really don’t know how this virus is
going to behave. We hope we will
come out quickly, but we shouldn’t
assume that. We may have a recurring
infection, we may be dealing with
something that takes a number of
years. I wouldn’t,
years. Iwouldn’t, with
something that takes a number of
years. I wouldn’t, with complete
years. Iwouldn’t, with complete
confidence,
years. I wouldn’t, with complete
confidence, think we will bounce
back quicker than the financial
crisis. We have to be careful about
that? It is clear it is going to
reshape our economy, ways of
working. This has damaged is worse
than the financial crisis and Keir
Starmer talked about tax rises as a
“Y
way out of this? George suggested
there would be two choices about how
much more you tax and how much less
much more you tax and how much lass
you spend. But
much more you tax and how much less
you spend. But there are two other
big choices. One of them goes to the
heart of what Paul
heart of what Pauljust said which
heart of what Paul just said which
is how
heart of what Pauljust said which
is how we are going to boost demand
as we start to climb out of this.
Because we have seen people scaling
right back on their spending, we
will have to give people that
confidence again and what we saw,
unfortunately after 2010 was a
reduction in the confidence in many
areas, are dropping off in demand.
That meant the economic cake was
That meant the economic rake was
smaller
That meant the economic cake was
smaller than it needed to be so we
have to make sure we have the
growth. Secondly, we need to take
decisions about where those cuts in
services or increases in tax fall.
If we look at what happened between
2010 and 2019, the worst of 10% of
2010 and 2019, the worst of 101: of
peopla with
2010 and 2019, the worst of 10% of
people with children saw their
incomes fall by 20%, according to
incomes fall by 2096, according to
the ISS.
incomes fall by 20%, according to
the ISS. The best of 10% of people,
the ISS. The best of 1096 of peopla,
as a
the ISS. The best of 10% of people,
as a result of successive people,
they only so that falling by 2%.
they only so that falling by 296.
There
they only so that falling by 2%.
There was a distributional choice
taken by successive Conservative
ministers. I am
ministers. lam not
taken by successive Conservative
ministers. I am not saying this to
make a party political point but we
need a new settlement after this.
Not just
Notjust because those of us who
Not just because those of us who
don’t
Notjust because those of us who
don’t like that level of inequality
and that level of deprivation, that
being morally abhorrent, but because
it has meant we have so many people
it has meant we have so many peopla
who are in
it has meant we have so many people
who are in such a difficult
precarious financial situation now,
that as they full into unemployment
they don’t have the ballast. If we
have continued disruption, we cannot
have continued disruption, we rannot
have that huge
have continued disruption, we cannot
have that huge black people in the
have that huge black peopla in the
British
have that huge black people in the
British population who are in such a
difficult and economic situation.
Talking of people talking
unemployment, let’s hear
unemployment, let’s hearfrom
unemployment, let’s hear from
another
unemployment, let’s hearfrom
another person who contacted us. I
mn a
run a medium—sized brewery business
nm a medium-sized brewery business
alongside
run a medium—sized brewery business
alongside working in the music
industry. Both these professions
have been severely disrupted by the
measures needed to flatten the
infection curve. The current
government backed plan to keep us
aﬂoat
afloat has been very welcome. When
aﬂoat has been very welcome. when
many
afloat has been very welcome. When
many restrictions live, help to keep
small venues, pubs and breweries
will be needed until they are
profitable again? The government
made this grand gesture of paying in
terms of furloughed staff and it has
been welcome, some have fallen
through the middle and we have heard
from people who are getting nothing.
from peopla who are getting nothing.
How do you
from people who are getting nothing.
How do you get out of that and keep
those businesses afloat is not
necessarily straightforward? I
obviously take Paul’s point, we will
have to live with this virus for as
far as I ran
far as I can see for a considerable
far as I ran see for a considerabla
period of time
far as I can see for a considerable
period of time until the vaccine is
discovered and then applied to the
population if it is. That is going
to require different ways of working
and we will have to find ways for
the entertainment industry and the
brewing industry to get back to some
kind of life. And I think the
thinking this country will go back
to the world February 2020 is big
mistake. It is going to be a new
world we live in. Some of those
people who were furloughed are not
peopla who were furloughed are not
going to have
people who were furloughed are not
going to have jobs to go
going to havejobs to go back
people who were furloughed are not
going to have jobs to go back to.
going to havejobs to go back to. I
going to have jobs to go back to. I
have
going to havejobs to go back to. I
have been a
going to have jobs to go back to. I
have been a big
going to havejobs to go back to. I
have been a big supporter of what
Rishi Sunak has done, to throw money
at the problem. You fix the roof as
the sun is shining so you can deal
the sun is shining so you ran deal
with a
the sun is shining so you can deal
with a storm like this. So you have
the credibility as a country and the
financial markets to go and borrow.
The government is borrowing, I
reckon, one in every £3 we are
reckon, one in every B we are
spending on
reckon, one in every £3 we are
spending on every nurse, police
officer, on every furloughed person,
on the pensions they are paying. We
are borrowing a huge amount and we
need to maintain international
confidence particularly when the
confidence particularty when the
Bank
confidence particularly when the
Bank of England stops printing money
to pay for all this, which is what
is happening at the moment. The
issue of how you will allow the
economy to regenerate and withdraw
some of these schemes is going to be
very fraught and very contested in
British politics. I say this now as
British politic. I say this now as
an editor
British politics. I say this now as
an editor and an observer rather
than a participant. The furlough
scheme, has been a life—saver
scheme, has been a life—saverfor
scheme, has been a life-saver for
millions of
scheme, has been a life—saverfor
millions of people and people in my
millions of peopla and peopla in my
company have
millions of people and people in my
company have been furloughed to save
the company and their
the company and theirjobs. But the
truth is, if you let that furlough
in place for years and years, there
will be people who frankly were
unemployed because they were never
going to go back to a job but
weren’t released into the labour
market to try and find a new
market to try and find a newjob.
market to try and find a new job.
That is
market to try and find a newjob.
That is what we need to do for them
now and provide that support. But if
you allow it to carry on for ever,
and I am talking not about this year
but the years ahead, you have left
them in limbo. The same is true of
them in limbo. The same is tme of
some of
them in limbo. The same is true of
some of these companies that are
getting loans, and we all hope they
come back, but not all of them will.
We have to be honest about that. We
need to start to have the
discussion, even though it is not an
issue we need to confront right now.
If you keep basically, companies
that have gone bust alive with a
credit line, you are not allowing
the peopla
the people involved in that company
the peopla involved in that company
to go off and
the people involved in that company
to go off and do other things,
create new companies and so on. It
is a very tough set of choices the
government, and indeed the
opposition that wants to be the
government, are going to have to
confront. just
confront. Just saying we have thrown
confront. just saying we have thrown
all this money
confront. Just saying we have thrown
all this money at it, go on throwing
the money at it and go on borrowing
the money, is not realistic. I am
all for firing up
all forfiring up the
the money, is not realistic. I am
all for firing up the enterprise and
getting investment into the country,
because the one thing I think this
generation of politicians is going
to have to deal with, very sadly,
which my government I was part of
didn’t have to deal with, is
unemployment. That, we have not seen
in this country on a large scale for
many decades. That is very scarring,
many decades. That is very starring,
"TY
very damaging
many decades. That is very scarring,
very damaging for the people
involved, families and the
communities. Really, that is another
issue that will come back
centrestage. Ultimately, you need
successful businesses that want to
employ people have had the capacity
employ peopla have had the capacity
to
employ people have had the capacity
to employ people and they have to
to employ peopla and they have to
allow
to employ people and they have to
allow those businesses that will not
succeed, sadly, to close. You have
to allow peopla
to allow people who are furloughed,
to allow peopla who are furloughed,
and I am
to allow people who are furloughed,
and I am not talking about this
year, but the years ahead, who
furloughed and will not return to
the job they had to go and get the
new
newjob. That is going to be the
new job. That is going to be the
most
newjob. That is going to be the
most difficult decisions that these
guys are going to have to make.
Does the Treasury have an exit
strategy when it comes to
furloughing?
furloughing? There is a huge amount
of uncertainty and we all understand
that, but we have the plans set out
at the moment, which is the furlough
continues until
continues untilJune. Are you
continues until june. Are you
looking at
continues untilJune. Are you
looking at extending that? Wait
until we see what happens at the
time. It will be extended, there is
no way it will be coming to an end.
It is an expensive scheme. This
depends largely on ourselves and how
we deal with the lockdown and
keeping to these social distancing
measures as we go forward. What we
measures as we go forward. what we
do not
measures as we go forward. What we
do not know is how the Oxford
University tie—up with AstraZeneca
University tie-up with AstraZenera
that we
University tie—up with AstraZeneca
that we learnt about today is going
to do, if indeed the Tesco well, on
the vaccine. That could be a
complete game changer. That is going
to be some time off. When it comes
to be some time off. when it comes
to the
to be some time off. When it comes
to the hospitality industry in
particular, how will they begin to
get back on their feet? George is
right, there has been a huge amount
of initial assistance, £25,000
grants, not loans, provided to
businesses at the stage and they are
not paying any business rates. Half
the businesses in Britain will not
be paying business rates, including
hospitality, this year. We cannot
hospitality, this year. We rannot
put the tart
hospitality, this year. We cannot
put the cart before the horse. First
put the tart before the horse. First
of all we
put the cart before the horse. First
of all we have to see the
all—important art rate, which we
all-important art rate, which we
will be hearing
all—important art rate, which we
will be hearing much more about,
come down. We know it is between 0.6
and 0.9 and that will enable us
and 0.9 and that will enabla us
through the
and 0.9 and that will enable us
through the plan released next week
to tweak social distancing, and
there are many different aspects to
this. Cleariy
this. Clearly you do not go straight
this. Cleariy you do not go straight
from
this. Clearly you do not go straight
from where we are today to pubs and
clubs being open and that problem
dubs being open and that problem
being
clubs being open and that problem
being resolved. Will you help keep
being resolved. will you help keep
pubs and
being resolved. Will you help keep
pubs and breweries alive? We want to
try and keep the economy intact so
if we are able to defeat this thing
quickly that they are still there.
What
what you
quickly that they are still there.
What you are inviting me to do is
what you are inviting me to do is
guess. just
What you are inviting me to do is
guess. Just answer the question.
guess. just answer the question.
Nobody ran
guess. Just answer the question.
Nobody can see the future of the
Nobody ran see the future of the
virus in
Nobody can see the future of the
virus in the same way you or I did
not see it coming in the first
place. Another question from John
Chadwick. If the government does not
know who is carrying the virus in
our communities, how does the
government know where and when to
lift restrictions on movement? Paul?
This is a very critical point. The
only tool we have in our armoury at
this moment is testing, testing,
testing, and the appropriate changes
in how society works which is built
on that. Critical to the nation’s
response to the pandemic is testing.
Was it put in place properly? Was it
Was it put in place property? Was it
put in place
Was it put in place properly? Was it
put in place rapidly enough? What is
put in place rapidly enough? what is
your answer to
put in place rapidly enough? What is
your answer to that? My answer is I
think we certainly could have done
better. We were not prepared for it,
as I said. Policy that was followed,
a mixture of political and
scientific and medical advice
working together, decided to invest
in large mega labs and these labs
will be absolutely essential, but
because we did not have the
preparation it takes a lot of effort
to get them to work. It is not
simply putting the lab there, there
is the workﬂow, getting the
samples, getting them
is the workflow, getting the
samples, getting them collected,
getting the IT working, getting the
results back in appropriate time.
Anybody could have seen that that
would be a difficult thing to do.
The proper decision should have
been, yes, to get the mega labs in
place, but to encourage as many
other places, such as the Francis
Crick Institute, which did respond,
where you could do local testing.
where you could do [oral testing.
That
where you could do local testing.
That was critical particularly in
That was critical particularty in
the
That was critical particularly in
the health care worker sector. How
the health rare worker sector. How
much
the health care worker sector. How
much difference do you think will
this 100,000 target make? 100,000 is
a number with a lot of notes in it.
It was a PR stunt that has gone a
bit wrong. 100,000, why
bit wrong. 100,000, why100,000?
where is
Where is the strategy in that? It
where is the strategy in that? It
just sounded
Where is the strategy in that? It
just sounded good. Yesterday it was
50,000, but we should not get hung
“P
up on that. The real reality is
this. If we had had local testing,
connected to local hospitals, we
connected to [oral hospitals, we
could
connected to local hospitals, we
could have made hospitals a safe
place. what
place. What we had is the potential
place. what we had is the potential
for having rare
place. What we had is the potential
for having care workers working on
for having rare workers working on
the wards,
for having care workers working on
the wards, working with six
patients, who were carrying the
disease and who were not being
tested. We heard Matt Hancock say a
couple of weeks ago that we have got
the capacity, but the NHS workers
are not coming forward. Do you
remember that? Why were they not
remember that? why were they not
coming
remember that? Why were they not
coming forward? Because the NHS
mles
rules would not let them. What do
mles would not let them. what do
you mean?
rules would not let them. What do
you mean? They had such restrictive
mles on
rules on who could be tested, they
mles on who could be tested, they
did not
rules on who could be tested, they
did not make the decision to test
everybody who was a front line
worker. In particular they would not
test anybody who had no symptoms. We
know with this disease you can be
know with this disease you ran be
infected
know with this disease you can be
infected and have no symptoms. This
makes absolutely no sense. We were
allowing potentially for front line
rare
care workers to be on the wards
rare workers to be on the wards
potentially
care workers to be on the wards
potentially infecting people because
we were not testing. That may have
been because they did not have
testing capacity throughout the
country, but you cannot say we do
not need to do it because we do not
have testing capacity. Even when we
could provide testing capacity, we
could not do it because of the NHS
mles. Testing
rules. Testing was critical, it has
mles. Testing was critical, it has
not been
rules. Testing was critical, it has
not been handled properly. Gene, I
not been handled property. Gene, I
want to
not been handled properly. Gene, I
want to come to you on this. Paul is
saying basically it is a bit of a
mess. I think we should have had the
mega labs, but it has not been as
creative or as imaginative in
getting this going as quickly as
possible. John’s question is if the
possible. john’s question is if the
government
possible. John’s question is if the
government and the Scottish
Government does not know who has the
vims in our
virus in our communities, how can we
virus in our communities, how ran we
know when
virus in our communities, how can we
know when and where to lift
restrictions on movement? What are
restrictions on movement? what are
you doing there
restrictions on movement? What are
you doing there in order to have a
strategy on that? Our initial
strategy was what was described as
the containment strategy, when
essentially you tested and tracked
contacts and isolated those. As the
virus had clearly much wider
virus had dearty much wider
community
virus had clearly much wider
community transmission we moved
steadily into where we are now,
which is locked out. Our current
testing strategy in Scotland is to
certainly test key workers, to widen
that now to beyond health and social
rare. We
care. We are testing over
70—year—olds in hospital. We are
70-year-olds in hospital. We are
testing
70—year—olds in hospital. We are
testing symptomatic patients in our
residence in social care. And we are
residence in social rare. And we are
testing new
residence in social care. And we are
testing new admissions to our care
testing new admissions to our rare
homes to
testing new admissions to our care
homes to make sure that we are not
bringing the virus into those care
bringing the virus into those rare
homes.
bringing the virus into those care
homes. But I think we need to be a
bit rareful
bit careful here that at the very
outset of our experience of this
pandemic the evidence then, the
scientific and medical, clinical
evidence, and advise then, said that
asymptomatic people were probably
asymptomatic peopla were probably
not
asymptomatic people were probably
not infectious. In fact, in some
instances the evidence said... That
is simply not correct. Paul is
taking issue with that. I am taking
issue with it... Hang on one second.
This is your specialist area. We
have known for a significant period
of time, and it has been known
across the world, that those who are
infected do not always have
symptoms. The policies should have
been... She was saying that
asymptomatic people may not be
infectious. Yes, but what I am
saying is people without symptoms
saying is peopla without symptoms
are
saying is people without symptoms
are infected and therefore
potentially it will be transferring
the disease. That is a really
significant issue.
significant issue. Yes it is a
significant issue. What I was saying
significant issue. what I was saying
was two
significant issue. What I was saying
was two points. First of all, the
evidence we were looking at and the
UK Government was looking at was
that peopla
that people without symptoms were
that peopla without symptoms were
unlikely to
that people without symptoms were
unlikely to be infectious, but more
importantly that the test itself
really it was only at its most
effective if you were symptomatic.
As I said earlier, this virus is 130
As I said eartier, this virus is 130
days or so old
As I said earlier, this virus is 130
days or so old here now in the UK,
in Scotland, and the rest of the UK
and undoubtedly we are learning as
we progress. The key is that our
strategies and our response needs to
be ﬂeet
be fleet of foot. We have increased
be ﬂeet of foot. We have increased
our testing
be fleet of foot. We have increased
our testing capacity in our NHS labs
here in Scotland, all our boards by
the end of next week will have their
individual capacity to gather those
tests so that in a country like
Scotland with remote and rural areas
Scotland with remote and mral areas
it is
Scotland with remote and rural areas
it is particularly important, and we
it is particularty important, and we
will set
it is particularly important, and we
will set out next week our strategy
for test, trace and isolate, which
regardless of what we do in terms of
easing the current lockdown
measures, will be a central part of
our response. But I also think we
need to be careful that at the
moment my understanding is that the
reproduction rate is considered to
be under one stop that is
significantly different from the
start where it was round about
three. It is under one, we are not
confident yet about how far under it
is, then there is room for manoeuvre
in terms of what measures might we
ease at any one point. Yes. The
question is not necessarily about
what measures we might ease. In
fairness to
fairness toJohn, he is not trying
fairness to john, he is not trying
to look
fairness toJohn, he is not trying
to look backwards, he is trying to
look forward. How do we find out who
has got the virus and if we don’t
find out, how can the government
find out, how ran the government
know
find out, how can the government
know when and where to lift the
restrictions? This is an area where
we need to see transparency and we
have been trying to be constructive
around this in having those
discussions with government and
saying we need to be open around
these questions. People will
remember there was a debate a few
weeks ago about how we were going to
have antibody testing, that testing
looking to see if people had already
looking to see if peopla had already
had the
looking to see if people had already
had the virus and that was going to
be widely available and now it
appears that those tests were not as
accurate as we initially thought, we
would not have the large numbers
that we initially thought we would
have. It is going to be necessary
for us to have a pick—up in lots of
for us to have a pick-up in lots of
different
for us to have a pick—up in lots of
different kinds of activity and been
really need to see a plan around
this and we have to have confidence
in this. That relates to the
previous question. We need to make
sure that there is buy into this
process right across the process,
trade unions, individuals, otherwise
it will not work when we come out of
these different forms of lockdown
because you will have debates about
different kinds of workplaces and
whether one is safe and one is not.
We need to have a clear process. I
We need to have a dear process. I
want to
We need to have a clear process. I
want to work with the Chancellor on
that. We have to do that openly,
because people will raise questions
about it and it will not work to the
extent it could. Grant, we have had
some tweets. Dan Bradshaw, a
paramedic, said the government are
failing to provide PPE an adequate
testing to front line health care
workers. I am a front line health
rare
care worker and was tested five
rare worker and was tested five
weeks ago
care worker and was tested five
weeks ago and still no results. When
weeks ago and still no results. when
is the
weeks ago and still no results. When
is the government going to get a
grip? Another one, Lindsay Thomas, a
GP, what is the rationale behind the
criteria for testing? This comes
back to strategy, not a target, a
strategy. As a GP I cannot test
patients with symptoms, so it is
guesswork. Surely it makes sense for
us to test patients feeling poorly
us to test patients feeling poorty
enough?
us to test patients feeling poorly
enough? What is your response? Right
enough? what is your response? Right
now our testing
enough? What is your response? Right
now our testing capacity today of
90,000, and when we look
90,000, and when we look back
tomorrow on where we end on, we did
81,500 test yesterday... This is a
question about strategy rather than
targets. I am trying to answer both
questions at the same time. It is
quite possible tomorrow that we will
quite possibla tomorrow that we will
see
quite possible tomorrow that we will
see we did reach the 100,000 target.
whether
Whether or not we did, it does not
whether or not we did, it does not
matter, the
Whether or not we did, it does not
matter, the point is to have
available tests. To the tweets and
the questioner, the good thing is
that now you can go on the
that now you ran go on the
government
that now you can go on the
government website if you are a
worker in hospital, a nurse, doctor,
if you are a rare
if you are a care home location,
if you are a rare home location,
either as a
if you are a care home location,
either as a resident or as somebody,
a rare
a care worker... It is not much good
a rare worker... It is not much good
if you have to wait
a care worker... It is not much good
if you have to wait five weeks. I
don’t know about that case, but you
don’t know about that use, but you
ran go online
don’t know about that case, but you
can go online now and you can book a
ran go online now and you ran book a
place and you ran
can go online now and you can book a
place and you can do that either by
place and you ran do that either by
going to a test
place and you can do that either by
going to a test centre, not so good
if you are in a place of work, or by
ifyou are in a place ofwork, or by
getting a home
if you are in a place of work, or by
getting a home test. I’ll give you
an example of the speed at which
this has been scaled up, at the
beginning of the week there were
only 5000 home tests available and
now there are 20,000 available and
that is why we would like to meet
the 100,000 target. The point is
peopla
people should be able to go online,
peopla should be able to go online,
order it
people should be able to go online,
order it themselves and get it done.
What about knowing where and when
what about knowing where and when
and who
What about knowing where and when
and who has coronavirus, that is
and who has coronavims, that is
about
and who has coronavirus, that is
about contact rating, which you
stopped early on? We expanded it to
stopped earty on? We expanded it to
symptomatic
stopped early on? We expanded it to
symptomatic and asymptomatic care
symptomatic and asymptomatic rare
workers, for
symptomatic and asymptomatic care
workers, for example. People can
workers, for example. People ran
take this
workers, for example. People can
take this test if they are concerned
at this stage. To the track and
trace thing, we started off with a
low capacity, but I take Paul’s
point, he is the expert in this. He
said you were too slow. We started
off with 2000 tests at the beginning
of this crisis, it is now getting to
100,000 or above and there is
another super lab opening in
Cambridge on Monday. We had to
create the testing capacity for the
most part, although I accept there
maybe some things others could have
done, you are the expert. But it is
a huge effort to build this up. We
couldn’t maintain that process. Of
the tests that we had, when the
tests that we had, when this got
large enough that it was in society,
we focus the available testing,
rightly on scientific advice in the
hospitals, which required front—line
hospitals, which required front-line
testing. In the
hospitals, which required front—line
testing. In the ideal world, if we
were to do this again, we would have
a 100,000 test capacity and more
from the outset. 0n contact tracing,
from the outset. On contact tracing,
we are looking for the app to be
available in the middle of May. This
is just to remind
isjust to remind people it is an
is just to remind peopla it is an
evil
isjust to remind people it is an
evil download on your phone and it
will see if we have blue contact
between us. All anonymously done. ——
between us. All anonymously done. --
Bluetooth.
between us. All anonymously done. ——
Bluetooth. If I am positive, it will
give you the heads up to go and get
tested. 50 that will be an important
tested. So that will be an important
part in taking us
tested. 50 that will be an important
part in taking us forward. I will
come back to this, but does that
strategy sank clear to you? Testing
strategy sank dear to you? Testing
is critical
strategy sank clear to you? Testing
is critical to easing the lockdown
and using technology, as they have
done in South Korea and these other
Asian countries, even with the
intmsion
intrusion on our privacy that is
intmsion on our privacy that is
going to
intrusion on our privacy that is
going to bring, is going to be
critical to get the economy back on
its feet. What everyone has alluded
its feet. what everyone has alluded
to here, is
its feet. What everyone has alluded
to here, is the difficulties in
getting the testing programme off
the ground, the enormous bureaucracy
that was encountered, the failure to
involve people outside Public Health
involve peopla outside Public Health
England and
involve people outside Public Health
England and laboratories like
Paul’s. I actually think Matt
Hancock did the
Hancock did thejob
Paul’s. I actually think Matt
Hancock did the job that sometimes
the Secretary of State needs to,
here is a bloody great target and go
and hit it. I think he has a great
chance, amazingly, of hitting it.
Let’s not repeat all this if we get
a vaccine. We should be planning
now, I have no idea, I am
now, I have no idea, lam not
a vaccine. We should be planning
now, I have no idea, I am not a
now, I have no idea, lam nota
scientist
now, I have no idea, I am not a
scientist and I don’t know if a
vaccine will be developed into
months or two years, but when it
comes, if a government cannot
vaccinate everyone in the population
who wants that vaccine, pretty
quickly, then I think they will be
quickly, than I think they will be
in real
quickly, then I think they will be
in real trouble. I think they should
in real trouhla. I think they should
be learning
in real trouble. I think they should
be learning from this experience,
not just
notjust politicians, but the people
not just politicians, but the peopla
who mn
notjust politicians, but the people
who run the NHS, and working out
who nm the NHS, and working out
how, once
who run the NHS, and working out
how, once the vaccine is discovered,
which we all hope will happen, think
ahead to where you are going to be
and hopefully in a few months, maybe
a few years. I want another
question, but Paul you want to come
back quickly. Testing is critical, I
work on yeast and I only learned
this in the last month or so. But
testing is critical. We have been in
the front line over this and over
the last number of weeks front line
workers have been begging for
testing. They haven’t even provided
it. 8000 community nurses in North
London had five tests a day. This is
no way to mn
no way to nm a
London had five tests a day. This is
no way to run a ship. Then we have
no way to nm a ship. Then we have
this
no way to mn a ship. Then we have
this question of
no way to run a ship. Then we have
this question of capability of
testing. Capacity. Capacity. You are
the transport Minister, let’s take a
train metaphor. We are travelling
from London to Paris, 0K? The
Channel Tunnel and may have capacity
for ten trains an hour but if you
only get three trains an hour to the
tunnel and three trains out, you
will have only testing at three. The
real problem we are having is the
workﬂow of getting actually the
samplas
workflow of getting actually the
samples out, getting the IT sorted,
actually putting the whole process,
actually putting the whola process,
focus
actually putting the whole process,
focus on the mega labs without
dealing with the workﬂow. That was
obvious to us weeks and weeks ago.
We have been telling people about it
for weeks and weeks. It has been
pitifuuy slow
pitifully slow to accept that that
pitifuuy slow to accept that that
is a big
pitifully slow to accept that that
is a big issue. A big mega lab will
have difficulties, they need to sort
it. It is easier for the smaller
labs, of course it is easier and
that should have been recognised at
the beginning. Lessons could have
been learnt from us, you could have
used us as research tools to help
drive the mega labs. It need a great
imagination, greater leadership
really about the political and also
frankly, the scientific and medical
level. When we come to look at it we
lavel. when we come to look at it we
will see
level. when we come to look at it we
will see we
level. When we come to look at it we
will see we have had many lessons we
will see we have had many lassons we
should
will see we have had many lessons we
should have learned. I
should have learned. Ijust want to
take one more question, if I can. We
take one more question, if I ran. We
have spent a long
take one more question, if I can. We
have spent a long time talking about
this and not gotten as many
questions as I would like. Good
evening. My name is
evening. My name isJulie Benson
evening. My name is julie Benson
from
evening. My name isJulie Benson
from Leeds. I
from Leeds. Iwould
evening. My name isJulie Benson
from Leeds. I would like to ask the
panel, in Australia when people were
ﬂying back in
flying back in before they close the
ﬂying back in before they close the
borders,
flying back in before they close the
borders, people were made to isolate
into a hotel for two weeks and were
not allowed to go home until they
were tested and cleared. I would
like to understand why we are not
taking those kinds of measures in
this country, why we are allowing
peopla to ﬂy
people to fly in and not isolating
peopla to ﬂy in and not isolating
them
people to fly in and not isolating
them the same in a hotel. Thank you.
Week after week, this question has
come up, which is why I wanted to
take it tonight. Jeane, this is
take it tonight. jeane, this is
happening
take it tonight. Jeane, this is
happening in Scotland as well as the
rest of the UK, is going to change
or are we going to let people in
or are we going to let peopla in
willy-nilly?
or are we going to let people in
willy—nilly? We cannot make that
willy-nilly? We cannot make that
decision
willy—nilly? We cannot make that
decision in Scotland, because the
decision about ports, whether they
are airports, is made by the
government. What would you like to
government. what would you like to
happen? The
government. What would you like to
happen? The question she just asked
is absolutely right. We will be
wanting the UK Government to give
very serious consideration to
stopping the inward transmission of
the virus. Particularly given the
the vims. Particularty given the
fact
the virus. Particularly given the
fact that the people across Scotland
fact that the peopla across Scotland
and
fact that the people across Scotland
andindeed
and indeed across the UK have worked
so hard to successfully
so he rd to successfully suppress
and indeed across the UK have worked
so hard to successfully suppress it
so hard to successfuuy suppress it
to this point.
so hard to successfully suppress it
to this point. It seems to me
foolhardy to then not give serious
consideration to what we do about
international travel both into and
out of the UK. Is this something you
have been pushing for, as the
Scottish Government? It is something
we have raised and then continuing
discussions of we have collectively
discussions of we have collactively
looked
discussions of we have collectively
looked across the four nations to
look at what measures we might make
to ease the lockdown and that is one
of the areas we will pursue with the
UK Government and the Prime Minister
in the discussions that we have.
People have been asking this time
and time again and cannot
understand, and I can’t either, when
so many other countries put people
so many other countries put peopla
into
so many other countries put people
into quarantine if they come into
the country? I think there have been
serious concerns around this. What
serious concerns around this. what
we have
serious concerns around this. What
we have been saying to government,
it needs to be open around its
reasoning on this question. It is
not that he wanted to change, but
you want to understand the reason?
We need to understand why that
decision has been taken because
practice in other countries has been
different. If we look at other
people coming into the country, I
peopla coming into the country, I
have
people coming into the country, I
have dealt with huge numbers of
Brits around the world who would
desperately love to be back here and
are being brought back at a much
slower rate. Maybe Grant can
slower rate. Maybe Grant ran
enlighten us
slower rate. Maybe Grant can
enlighten us a little bit more. I
accept on the one hand, some of the
measures that were put in place in
other nations haven’t necessarily
worked. For example, temperature
measurement as people come in,
because that is not robust,
obviously. We do need to look at the
fact that potentially there have
been people coming into the country
who might have been taking the virus
with them. But this is conjoined
with the testing issue. I am sorry
to bring it back to that and I know
we have been talking about it, but
people who have come back into the
peopla who have come back into the
country had
people who have come back into the
country had then been able to
quickly access a test for themselves
to know what their situation was,
then we could have dealt with this
more robustly. I think this is more
of an issue because we don’t yet
have that community testing in the
UK to the extent that applies in
many other country. Henry has
tweeted, we are all on the up down
so ban peopla
so ban people coming into this
so ban peopla coming into this
country
so ban people coming into this
country would have been tested and
they should spend 1A days in
they should spend 14 days in
quarantine.
they should spend 1A days in
quarantine. Australia and New
Zealand were introducing this policy
when we were going to the Cheltenham
races. Is this going to change,
grand? Different countries are in
different moments of this pandemic
at different times. But whilst it is
endemic in this country, in other
words prevalent across the
population, it makes no great
difference to the overall figures,
according to the scientists and
medical experts. However, that
changes as we get a grip of those
numbers and then becomes something
which is very valuable to do. Isn’t
which is very valuabla to do. Isn’t
that the
which is very valuable to do. Isn’t
that the case now, we are below one?
that the use now, we are below one?
Starting to use
that the case now, we are below one?
Starting to use the classic
flattening of the curve, it is
ﬂattening of the curve, it is
starting to
flattening of the curve, it is
starting to come down but there is
the important point of returning
British nationals, but it is
absolutely true to say, if the
absolutely tme to say, if the
British
absolutely true to say, if the
British people themselves are being
asked to continue with social
distancing measures, it is quite
right to expect people coming into
the country would have the same
measures apply to them. So it is
actually something very much as we
get to the smaller numbers and not
wanting to see a repeat of the
infection, something very much as a
line of discussion. Paul? It is
obvious, we should be doing it and I
hope with the capacity for testing
we would have in place and with the
recognition of the importance of
this, in the coming months we will
introduce this because this is not
going to go away in a hurry. He
would require people coming into the
country to download the NHS app for
the track and tracing purposes as
well. I entirely agree with the
question. The lesson of all of this
question. The lasson of all of this
is treat
question. The lesson of all of this
is treat the public like adults and
explain to them exactly why you are
doing these things. Otherwise people
sit at home and they go, hold on
there is a walker in Derbyshire and
they have a drone following them and
barking at them to go back home when
you have thousands of people going
you have thousands of peopla going
through
you have thousands of people going
through Heathrow Airport. Grant
says, the scientists tell us at the
moment it is not statistically
significant, then the Walker on his
significant, than the Walker on his
own is
significant, then the Walker on his
own is not statistically significant
either. People are very afraid,
understandably for themselves and
their loved ones and they will take
the word of the government and the
Prime Minister stands there, as he
did today, he is very optimistic and
impressive when he does that but I
think we are coming to the end of
taking the ministerial information.
People are getting their information
from all over the world. I think we
are moving into a phase where it is
in the government’s interest to open
this up, explain all their thinking
and carry people with them, trying
and carry peopla with them, trying
tarry
carry the
and carry people with them, trying
carry the opposition with them, try
and carry the media with them, but
above all try and carry the public.
I always found if you treated the
pub“:
public like adults, they responded
like adults. I think George is so
right. I am
right. lam not
like adults. I think George is so
right. I am not sure we have been
treating the public, society as
grown-ups.
grown—ups. We have had the slightly
grown-ups. We have had the slightly
weaselly
grown—ups. We have had the slightly
weaselly explanations as to what we
should be doing and capacity and
these sorts of things. We are in a
crisis, we know it is difficult, we
need, for leadership, you need to be
seen to take on the problems and
explain them. I think that is the
“Y
way through it. I add to that, we
have to act better as a community,
we have to work together to get this
through. We need proper leadership,
proper transparency,
propertransparency, proper
communication so we can get to that
communication so we ran get to that
as a better
communication so we can get to that
as a better community. We are out of
time, I
time, lam
as a better community. We are out of
time, I am afraid. Tonight,
time, lam afraid. Tonight, our
recorder questions came from Leeds
in this virtual New World we are
living in. Next week we want
questions coming from people living
questions coming from peopla living
in or
questions coming from people living
in or around Newcastle and the week
after that from Oxford. You cannot
come to the studio, not yet anyway.
I cannot wait until that can happen
I rannot wait until that ran happen
again, but we
I cannot wait until that can happen
again, but we do want to hear from
you because you make Question Time
what it is. Next week, if you live
in Newcastle, go to the Question
Time website and apply in the usual
way. Let us know what you want to
55V
say and then you will record your
question and we can help you with
question and we ran help you with
that.
question and we can help you with
that. Send it in, just like the ones
you saw this evening. If you want to
join the discussion on what we have
been talking about, you can and join
been talking about, you ran and join
Adrian
been talking about, you can and join
Adrian Charles and guests and
Question Time extra time on five
live now. --
live now. —— Adrian Childs. Thank
live now. -- Adrian Childs. Thank
you for your
live now. —— Adrian Childs. Thank
you for your question is, thank you
jeane from
Jeane from Edinburgh. Thank you to
jeane from Edinburgh. Thank you to
everyone he
Jeane from Edinburgh. Thank you to
everyone he recorded a question or
who got in touch on social media and
thank you at home for watching. From
Question Time, goodbye.
This is a message
from the Government.
Coronavirus is a national emergency,
life—threatening for people of all
ages, everywhere in the UK.
To help save lives, stay home.
Only go outside for food,
health reasons or work,
but only if you cannot
work from home.
Stay home.
Anyone can get it,
and anyone can spread it.
Stay home.
Protect the NHS frontline staff
working to save lives.